SECTION. LIV

"Vrihadaswa said, 'O Bharata, hearing those words of the swan, Damayanti
thenceforth lost all peace of mind on account of Nala. And heaving
frequent sighs she was filled with anxiety, and became melancholy and
pale-faced and lean. And with her heart possessed by the god of love, she
soon lost colour, and with her upturned gaze and modes of abstraction,
looked like one demented. And she lost all inclination for beds and seats
and object of enjoyment. And she ceased to lie down by day or night,
always weeping with exclamation of Oh! and Alas! And beholding her uneasy
and fallen into that condition, her hand-maids represented, O king, the
matter of her illness unto the ruler of Vidarbha by indirect hints. And
king Bhima, hearing of this from the handmaids of Damayanti, regarded the
affair of his daughter to be serious. And he asked himself, 'Why is it
that my daughter seemeth to be so ill now?' And the king, reflecting by
himself that his daughter had attained to puberty, concluded that
Damayanti's Swayamvara should take place. And the monarch, O exalted one,
(invited) all the rulers of the earth, saying, Ye heroes, know that
Damayanti's Swayamvara is at hand, And all the kings, hearing of
Damayanti's Swayamvara, came unto Bhima, agreeable to his message,
filling the earth with the clatter of their cars, the roar of their
elephants, and the neighing of their horses, and accompanied with their
fine-looking battalions decked in ornaments and graceful garlands. And
the mighty-armed Bhima paid due reverence unto those illustrious
monarchs. And duly honoured by him they took up their quarters there.'

"And at the juncture, those foremost of celestial Rishis possessed of
great splendour, of great wisdom and great vows--namely, Narada and
Parvata--having arrived in course of their wandering at the regions of
Indra entered the mansion of the lord of the immortals, receiving proper
worship. And Maghavat having worshipped them reverentially, inquired
after their undisturbed peace and welfare as regards all respects. And
Narada said, 'O lord, O divine one, peace attendeth us in every respect.
And, O Maghavat, peace attendeth also O exalted one, the kings of the
whole world.'

"Vrihadaswa continued. 'Hearing the words of Narada the slaver of Vala
and Vritra said, 'Those righteous rulers of the earth who fight
renouncing all desire of life, and who meet death when their time is come
by means of weapons, without flying from the field,--theirs is this
region, everlasting unto them and granting all desires, even as it is to
me. Where be those Kshatriya heroes? I do not see those kings approach
(now) Where are my favourite guests?' Thus addressed by Sakra, Narada
replied, 'Listen, O Mahavat, why seest not thou the kings (now)? The
ruler of the Vidarbhas hath a daughter--the celebrated Damayanti. In
beauty she transcendeth all the women of the earth. Her Swayamvara, O
Sakra, will take place shortly. Thither are going all the kings and
Princes from all directions. And all the lords of the earth desire to
have that pearl of the earth,--desire to have her eagerly, O slaver of
Vala and Vritra.' And while they were talking thus, those foremost of the
immortals, the Lokapalas with Agni among them, appeared before the lord
of the celestials. And all of them heard the words of Narada fraught with
grave import. And as soon as they heard them, they exclaimed in rapture,
We also will go there. And, O mighty monarch, accompanied by their
attendants and mounted on their (respective) vehicles, they set out for
the country of Vidarbhas, whither (had gone) all the kings. And, O son of
Kunti, the high-souled king Nala also hearing of that concourse of kings,
set out with a cheerful heart, full of Damayanti's love. And (it came to
pass) that the gods saw Nala on the way treading on the earth. And his
form owing to its beauty was like that of the god of love himself. And
beholding him resplendent as the sun, the Lokapalas were filled with
astonishment at his wealth of beauty, and abandoned their intention. And,
O king, leaving their cars in the sky the dwellers of heaven alighted
from the welkin and spake unto the ruler of the Nishadhas, saying, 'O
foremost of monarchs ruling the Nishadhas, O Nala, thou art devoted to
truth. Do thou help us. O best of men, be thou our messenger.'"



SECTION. LV

"Vrihadaswa continued, 'O Bharata, Nala pledged his word to the
celestials saying, 'I will do it.' And then approaching these, he asked
with folded hands. 'Who are ye? And who also is he that desireth me to be
his messenger? And what, further, shall I have to do for you? O tell me
truly!'--When the king of the Nishadhas spoke thus, Maghavat replied,
saying, 'Know us as the immortals come hither for Damayanti's sake. I am
Indra, this one is Agni, this the lord of waters, and this, O king, is
even Yama the destroyer of the bodies of men. Do thou inform Damayanti of
our arrival, saying, 'The guardians of the world, (consisting of) the
great Indra and the others, are coming to the assembly, desirous of
beholding (the Swayamvara). The gods, Sakra and Agni and Varuna and Yama,
desire to obtain thee. Do thou, therefore, choose one of them for thy
lord.' Thus addressed by Sakra, Nala said with joined hands, 'I have come
here with the self same object. It behoveth thee not to send me (on this
errand). How can a person who is himself under the influence of love
bring himself to speak thus unto a lady on behalf of others? Therefore,
spare me, ye gods' The gods, however, said, 'O ruler of the Nishadhas,
having promised first, saying, 'I will! why wilt thou not act accordingly
now? O ruler of the Nishadhas, tell us this without delay.'

"Vrihadaswa continued, 'Thus addressed by those celestials, the ruler of
Nishadhas spake again, saying, 'Those mansions are well-guarded. How can
I hope to enter them?' Indra replied, 'Thou shalt be able to enter.' And,
saying, So be it.' Nala thereupon went to the palace of Damayanti. And
having arrived there, he beheld the daughter of the king of Vidarbha
surrounded by her hand-maids, blazing in beauty and excelling in symmetry
of form, of limbs exceedingly delicate, of slender waist and fair eyes.
And she seemed to rebuke the light of the moon by her own splendour. And
as he gazed on that lady of sweet smiles. Nala's love increased, but
desirous of keeping his truth, he suppressed his passion. And at the
sight of Naishadha, overpowered by his effulgence, those first of women
sprang up from their seats in amazement. And filled with wonder (at his
sight), they praised Nala in gladness of heart. And without saying
anything, they mentally paid him homage, 'Oh, what comeliness! Oh, what
gentleness belongeth to this high-souled one! Who is he? Is he some god
or Yaksha or Gandharva?' And those foremost of women, confounded by
Nala's splendour and bashfulness would not accost him at all in speech.
And Damayanti although herself struck with amazement, smilingly addressed
the warlike Nala who also gently smiled at her, saying, 'What art thou, O
thou of faultless features, that hast come here awakening my love? O
sinless one, O hero of celestial form, I am anxious to know who thou art
that hast come hither. And why hast thou come hither? And how is it that
thou hast not been discovered by any one, considering that my apartments
are well-guarded and the king's mandates are stern.' Thus addressed by
the daughter of the king of the Vidarbhas, Nala replied, 'O beauteous
lady, know that my name is Nala. I come here as the messenger of the
gods. The celestials, Sakra, Agni, Varuna and Yama, desire to have thee.
O beautiful lady, do thou choose one of them for thy lord. It is through
their power that I have entered here unperceived, and it is for this
reason that none saw me on my way or obstructed my entrance. O gentle
one, I have been sent by the foremost of the celestials even for this
object. Hearing this, O fortunate one, do what thou pleasest.'"



SECTION. LVI

"Vrihadaswa said, 'Damayanti, having bowed down unto the gods, thus
addressed Nala with a smile, 'O king, love me with proper regard, and
command me what I shall do for thee. Myself and what else of wealth is
mine are thine. Grant me, O exalted one, thy love in full trust. O king,
the language of the swans in burning me. It is for thy sake, O hero, that
I have caused the kings to meet. O giver of proper honour, if thou
forsake me who adore thee, for thy sake will I resort to poison, or fire,
or water or the rope.' Thus addressed by the daughter of the king of the
Vidarbhas, Nala answered her saying, 'With the Lokapalas present,
choosest thou a man? Do thou turn thy heart to those high-souled lords,
the creators of the worlds, unto the dust of whose feet I am not equal.
Displeasing the gods, a mortal cometh by death. Save me, O thou of
faultless limbs! Choose thou the all-excelling celestials. By accepting
the gods, do thou enjoy spotless robes, and celestial garlands of
variegated hues, and excellent ornaments. What woman would not choose as
her lord Hutasana--the chief of the celestials, who compassing the earth
swalloweth it? What woman would not choose him as her lord the dread of
whose mace induceth all creatures to tread the path of virtue? And what
woman would not choose as her lord the virtuous and high-souled Mahendra,
the lord of the celestials, the chastiser of Daityas and Danavas? Or, if
thou couldst choose in thy heart Varuna amongst the Lokapalas, do so
unhesitatingly. O accept this friendly advice.' Thus addressed by
Naishadha, Damayanti, with eyes bathed in tears of grief spake thus unto
Nala, 'O lord of the earth, bowing to all the gods, I choose thee for my
lord. Truly do I tell thee this.' The king, who had come as the messenger
of the gods, replied unto the trembling Damayanti standing with folded
hands, 'O amiable one, do as thou pleasest. Having given my pledge, O
blessed one, unto the gods in especial, how can I, having come on other's
mission, dare seek my own interest? If seeking my own interest consists
with virtue, I will seek it, and do thou also, O beauteous one, act
accordingly.' Then Damayanti of luminous smiles slowly spake unto king
Nala, in words choked with tears, 'O lord of men I see a blameless way,
by which no sin whatever will attach unto thee. O king, do thou, O
foremost of men, come to the Swayamvara in company with all the gods
headed by Indra. There, O Monarch, in the presence of the Lokapalas I
will, O tiger among men, choose thee--at which no blame will be thine.'
Thus addressed, O monarch, by the daughter of Vidarbha, king Nala
returned to where the gods were staying together. And beholding him
approach those great gods, the Lokapalas, eagerly asked him about all
that had happened saying, 'Hast thou, O king, seen Damayanti of sweet
smiles? What hath she said unto us all? O sinless monarch, tell us
everything.' Nala answered, 'Commanded by you I entered Damayanti's
palace furnished with lofty portals guarded by veteran warders bearing
wands. And as I entered, no one perceived me, by virtue of your power,
except the princess. And I saw her hand-maids, and they also saw me. And,
O exalted celestials, seeing me, they were filled with wonder. And as I
spake unto her of you, the fair-faced maiden, her will fixed on me, O ye
best of the gods, chose me (for her spouse).' And the maiden said, 'Let
the gods, O tiger among men, come with thee to the Swayamvara, I will in
their presence, choose thee. At this, O thou of mighty arms, no blame
will attach to thee.' 'This is all, ye gods, that took place, as I have
said. Finally, everything rests with you, ye foremost of celestials.'"



SECTION. LVII

"Vrihadaswa continued, 'Then at the sacred hour of the holy lunar day of
the auspicious season, king Bhima summoned the kings to the Swayamvara.
And hearing of it, all the lords of earth smit with love speedily came
thither, desirous of (possessing) Damayanti. And the monarchs entered the
amphitheatre decorated with golden pillars and a lofty portal arch, like
mighty lions entering the mountain wilds. And those lords of earth decked
with fragrant garlands and polished ear-rings hung with jewels seated
themselves on their several seats. And that sacred assembly of Kings,
graced by those tigers among men, resembled the Bhogavati swarming with
the Nagas, or a mountain cavern with tigers. And their arms were robust,
and resembling iron maces, and well-shaped, and graceful, and looking
like five-headed snakes. And graced with beautiful locks and fine noses
and eyes and brows, the countenance of the kings shone like stars in the
firmament. And (when the time came), Damayanti of beauteous face,
stealing the eyes and hearts of the princes by her dazzling light,
entered the hall. And the glances of those illustrious kings were
rivetted to those parts of her person where they had chanced to fall
first, without moving at all. And when, O Bharata, the names of the
monarchs were proclaimed, the daughter of Bhima saw five persons all
alike in appearance. And beholding them seated there, without difference
of any kind in form, doubt filled her mind, and she could not ascertain
which of them was king Nala. And at whomsoever (among them) she looked,
she regarded him to be the king of the Nishadhas. And filled with
anxiety, the beauteous one thought within herself, 'Oh, how shall I
distinguish the celestials, and how discern the royal Nala?' And thinking
thus, the daughter of Vidarbha became filled with grief. And, O Bharata,
recollecting the marks belonging to the celestials, of which she had
heard, she thought, 'Those attributes of the celestials, of which I have
heard from the aged, do not pertain to any of these deities present here
upon the earth.' And revolving the matter long in her mind, and
reflecting upon it repeatedly, she decided upon seeking the protection of
the gods themselves. And bowing down unto them with mind and speech, with
folded hands, she addressed them trembling, 'Since I heard the speech of
the swans, I chose the king of the Nishadhas as my lord. For the sake of
truth, O, let the gods reveal him to me. And as in thought or word I have
never swerved from him, O, let the gods, for the sake of that truth,
reveal him to me. And as the gods themselves have destined the ruler of
the Nishadhas to be my lord, O, let them, for the sake of that truth,
reveal him to me. And as it is for paying homage unto Nala that I have
adopted this vow, for the sake of that truth, O, let the gods reveal him
unto me, O, let the exalted guardians of the worlds assume their own
proper forms, so that I may know the righteous king.' Hearing these
piteous words of Damayanti, and ascertaining her fixed resolve, and
fervent love for the king of Nishadhas, the purity of her heart and her
inclination and regard and affection for Nala, the gods did as they had
been adjured, and assumed their respective attributes as best they could.
And thereupon she beheld the celestials unmoistened with perspiration,
with winkless eyes, and unfading garlands, unstained with dust, and
staying without touching the ground. And Naishadha stood revealed to his
shadow, his fading garlands, himself stained with dust and sweat, resting
on the ground with winking eyes. And, O Bharata, discerning the gods and
the virtuous Nala the daughter of Bhima chose Naishadha according to her
truth. And the large-eyed damsel then bashfully caught the hem of his
garment and placed round his neck a floral wreath of exceeding grace. And
when that fair-complexioned maiden had thus chosen Nala for her husband,
the kings suddenly broke out into exclamations of Oh! and Alas! And, O
Bharata, the gods and the great Rishis in wonder cried Excellent!
Excellent!, applauding the king the while. And, O Kauravya, the royal son
of Virasena, with heart filled with gladness, comforted the beauteous
Damayanti, saying, 'Since thou, O blessed one, hast chosen a mortal in
the presence of the celestials, know me for a husband even obedient to
thy command. And, O thou of sweet smiles, truly do I tell thee this that
as long as life continueth in this body of mine, I will remain thine and
thine alone. Damayanti also, with folded hands paid homage unto Nala in
words of like import. And the happy pair beholding Agni and the other
gods mentally sought their protection. And after the daughter of Bhima
had chosen Naishadha as her husband, the Lokapalas of exceeding
effulgence with pleased hearts, bestowed on Nala eight boons. And Sakra,
the lord of Sachi, bestowed on Nala the boon that he should be able to
behold his godship in sacrifices and that he should attain to blessed
legions thereafter, and Hutasana bestowed on him the boon of his own
presence whenever Naishadha wished, and regions also bright as himself.
And Yama granted him subtle taste in food as well as pre-eminence in
virtue. And the lord of waters granted Nala his own presence whenever he
desired, and also garlands of celestial fragrance. And thus each of them
bestowed upon him a couple of boons. And having bestowed these the gods
went to heaven. And the kings also, having witnessed with wonder
Damayanti's selection of Nala, returned delighted whence they had come.
And on the departure of those mighty monarchs, the high-souled Bhima,
well pleased, celebrated the wedding of Nala and Damayanti. And having
stayed there for a time according to his desire, Naishadha, the best of
men, returned to his own city with the permission of Bhima. And having
attained that pearl of a woman, the virtuous king, O monarch, began to
pass his days in joy, like the slayer of Vala and Vritra in the company
of Sachi. And resembling the sun in glory, the king, full of gladness,
began to rule his subjects righteously, and give them great satisfaction.
And like unto Yayati, the son of Nahusha, that intelligent monarch
celebrated the horse sacrifice and many other sacrifices with abundant
gifts to Brahmanas. And like unto a very god, Nala sported with Damayanti
in romantic woods and groves. And the high-minded king begat upon
Damayanti a son named Indrasena, and a daughter named Indrasena. And
celebrating sacrifice, and sporting (with Damayanti) thus, the king ruled
the earth abounding in wealth.'"



SECTION. LVIII

"Vrihadaswa said, 'When the blazing guardians of the worlds were
returning after the daughter of Bhima had chosen Naishadha, on their way
they met Dwapara with Kali approaching towards them. And seeing Kali,
Sakra the slayer of Vala and Vritra, said, 'O Kali, say whither thou art
going with Dwapara.' And thereupon Kali replied unto Sakra, 'Going to
Damayanti's Swayamvara, will I obtain her (for my wife), as my heart is
fixed upon that damsel.' Hearing this, Indra said with a smile, 'That
Swayamvara is already ended. In our sight she hath chosen Nala for her
husband.' Thus answered by Sakra, Kali, that vilest of the celestials,
filled with wrath, addressing all those gods spake, 'Since in the
presence of the celestials she hath chosen a mortal for her lord, it is
meet that she should undergo a heavy doom.' Upon hearing these words of
Kali, the celestials answered, 'It is with our sanction that Damayanti
hath chosen Nala. What damsel is there that would not choose king Nala
endued with every virtue? Well-versed in all duties, always conducting
himself with rectitude, he hath studied the four Vedas together with the
Puranas that are regarded as the fifth. Leading a life of harmlessness
unto all creatures, he is truth-telling and firm in his vows, and in his
house the gods are ever gratified by sacrifices held according to the
ordinance. In that tiger among men--that king resembling a Lokapala, is
truth, and forbearance, and knowledge, and asceticism, and purity and
self-control, and perfect tranquillity of soul. O Kali, the fool that
wisheth to curse Nala bearing such a character, curseth himself, and
destroyeth himself by his own act. And, O Kali, he that seeketh to curse
Nala crowned with such virtues, sinketh into the wide bottomless pit of
hell rife with torments.' Having said this to Kali and Dwapara, the gods
went to heaven. And when the gods had gone away, Kali said unto Dwapara,
'I am ill able, O Dwapara, to suppress my anger. I shall possess Nala,
deprive him of his kingdom, and he shall no more sport with Bhima's
daughter. Entering the dice, it behoveth thee to help me.'"




